README.md, before:

# Zino 2
[![build badge](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/Uninett/zino/tests.yml?branch=master)](https://github.com/Uninett/zino/actions)
[![codecov badge](https://codecov.io/gh/Uninett/zino/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/Uninett/zino)
[![Code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)

This is the modern Python re-implementation of the battle-proven Zino network
monitor, first implemented in Tcl/Scotty at Uninett in the 1990s.

This is still a work in progress, and is not yet a fully functional
replacement for the Tcl-based Zino.

Development of Zino 2.0 is fully sponsored by [NORDUnet](https://nordu.net/),
on behalf of the nordic NRENs.

## Installing Zino

First, ensure you have Python 3.9, 3.10 or 3.11 available on your system.
Second, we recommend creating a *Python virtual environment*, which is
isolated from other Python software installed on your system, and installing
Zino into that.

### Creating a Python virtual environment for Zino

To create a new virtual environment in the directory `./zino-env`, run:

```shell
python -m venv ./zino-env
```

This virtual environment can now be "activated" in your shell, so that any
further Python related commands that are run in your shell are running from inside the
new environment:

```shell
. ./zino-env/bin/activate
```

### Installing from PyPI

With your Zino virtual environment activated in your shell, run:

```shell
pip install zino
```

### Installing from source

With your Zino virtual environment activated in your shell, clone the Zino
source code directly from GitHub and install it from there:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/Uninett/zino.git
cd zino
pip install .
```

### Running Zino for the first time

You should be able to run Zino (although you will need to configure a list of
devices to poll in `polldevs.cf` first) from the command line as long as its
virtual environment is activated:

```console
$ zino
usage: zino [-h] [--polldevs PATH] [--debug] [--stop-in N]
zino: error: argument --polldevs: can't open 'polldevs.cf': [Errno 2] No such file or directory: 'polldevs.cf'
$
```

Even if the environment hasn't been activated in your shell, you can still run
Zino from inside this environment:

```console
$ ./zino-env/bin/zino
usage: zino [-h] [--polldevs PATH] [--debug] [--stop-in N]
zino: error: argument --polldevs: can't open 'polldevs.cf': [Errno 2] No such file or directory: 'polldevs.cf'
$
```

### Configuring Zino

At minimum, Zino must be configured with a list of SNMP-enabled routers to
monitor.  By default, it looks for `polldevs.cf` in the current working
directory, but a different configuration file can be specified using the
`--polldevs` command line option.

See the [polldevs.cf.example](./polldevs.cf.example) file for an example of the
configuration format.


## Developing Zino

### Running tests

[tox](https://tox.wiki/) and [pytest](https://pytest.org/) are used to run the
test suite. To run the test suite on all supported versions of Python, run:

```shell
tox
```

### Code style

Zino code should follow the [PEP-8](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/) and
[PEP-257](https://peps.python.org/pep-0257/)
guidelines. [Black](https://github.com/psf/black) and
[isort](https://pycqa.github.io/isort/) are used for automatic code
formatting. The [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/) tool is used to enforce
code styles at commit-time.

Before you start hacking, enable pre-commit hooks in your cloned repository,
like so:

```shell
pre-commit install
```

Commit message:

Rework the first run section based on feedback
This makes it clearer that proper functioning of the program requires a
config file, but that you can test the availability of the `zino`
command by calling it with the `--help` option.

README.md, after:

# Zino 2
[![build badge](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/Uninett/zino/tests.yml?branch=master)](https://github.com/Uninett/zino/actions)
[![codecov badge](https://codecov.io/gh/Uninett/zino/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/Uninett/zino)
[![Code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)

This is the modern Python re-implementation of the battle-proven Zino network
monitor, first implemented in Tcl/Scotty at Uninett in the 1990s.

This is still a work in progress, and is not yet a fully functional
replacement for the Tcl-based Zino.

Development of Zino 2.0 is fully sponsored by [NORDUnet](https://nordu.net/),
on behalf of the nordic NRENs.

## Installing Zino

First, ensure you have Python 3.9, 3.10 or 3.11 available on your system.
Second, we recommend creating a *Python virtual environment*, which is
isolated from other Python software installed on your system, and installing
Zino into that.

### Creating a Python virtual environment for Zino

To create a new virtual environment in the directory `./zino-env`, run:

```shell
python -m venv ./zino-env
```

This virtual environment can now be "activated" in your shell, so that any
further Python related commands that are run in your shell are running from inside the
new environment:

```shell
. ./zino-env/bin/activate
```

### Installing from PyPI

With your Zino virtual environment activated in your shell, run:

```shell
pip install zino
```

### Installing from source

With your Zino virtual environment activated in your shell, clone the Zino
source code directly from GitHub and install it from there:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/Uninett/zino.git
cd zino
pip install .
```

### Running Zino for the first time

In order for Zino to function properly, you first need to make a minimal
`polldevs.cf` configuration file, as described in the next section.  However,
at this point you can test that the `zino` command is available to run:

```console
$ zino --help
usage: zino [-h] [--polldevs PATH] [--debug] [--stop-in N]

Zino is not OpenView

options:
  -h, --help       show this help message and exit
  --polldevs PATH  Path to polldevs.cf
  --debug          Set global log level to DEBUG. Very chatty!
  --stop-in N      Stop zino after N seconds.
```

Even if the Python virtual environment hasn't been activated in your shell, you
can still run Zino directly from inside this environment, like so:

```shell
./zino-env/bin/zino --help
```

### Configuring Zino

At minimum, Zino must be configured with a list of SNMP-enabled routers to
monitor.  By default, it looks for `polldevs.cf` in the current working
directory, but a different configuration file can be specified using the
`--polldevs` command line option.

See the [polldevs.cf.example](./polldevs.cf.example) file for an example of the
configuration format.

Zino will check `polldevs.cf` for changes on a scheduled interval while it's
running, so any changes made while Zino is running should be picked up without
requiring a restart of the process.

## Developing Zino

### Running tests

[tox](https://tox.wiki/) and [pytest](https://pytest.org/) are used to run the
test suite. To run the test suite on all supported versions of Python, run:

```shell
tox
```

### Code style

Zino code should follow the [PEP-8](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/) and
[PEP-257](https://peps.python.org/pep-0257/)
guidelines. [Black](https://github.com/psf/black) and
[isort](https://pycqa.github.io/isort/) are used for automatic code
formatting. The [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/) tool is used to enforce
code styles at commit-time.

Before you start hacking, enable pre-commit hooks in your cloned repository,
like so:

```shell
pre-commit install
```
